(rock music)
Alright let's make a responsive website.
This thing is a little bit flashy
with all the pink and yellow, but
please bear with the design.
So what we're gonna be doing here is we've got
our standard website and it's got a number
of different sections.
We have the sort of hero image here.
We've got these calls to action with some sales.
We have a responsive navigation that's happening.
We've got your standard columns with your features.
We got about, or featured taco spot here.
And then a little spot for your Instagrams at the bottom.
And as I resize this,
well first of all the menu is gonna move from being
right here to when you get maybe a sort of mobile size,
it's gonna move up top and be able to open it and close that
with a little bit of JavaScript.
And then as you get smaller, you'll see that these
features right here will automatically resize themselves
but the top value here
is going to rearrange itself
to sort of one by two, and then eventually
we're gonna put those two underneath,
and then at a certain point,
everything will go down to one column
'cause we're sort of on mobile for that value.
So let's get started here.
Open up this responsive,
we've got all the different sections here.
So we've got top, we've got menu,
we've got features, we've got about, and we have galleries.
So those are sort of the five pieces
that are all direct descendants
of this wrapper element here.
And then if we open up responsive start,
this is where we're working right here.
I also have responsive-START.css
and this doesn't have much in it,
we do have that base styling which gives us this background,
but I've just bumped up the font size,
I've styled the button already,
and I put a max-width on our images
so they don't spill outside of any of our containers
that we have.
Good, so
let's start from top down,
we'll start with the top section.
And I also want you to open up your dev tools,
just so we can see exactly what's going on here.
So I'm gonna go to layout, and there's no grids yet,
but if we display grid on this sucker,
it's gonna show up and we'll turn that on.
And I want them to look a little bit something like this.
Now instead of actually defining the columns here,
I'm going to use grid template areas where we can name them
and that's gonna be really handy when we get to responsive
'cause we can just rearrange the actual grid.
So let's say grid-template-areas,
and I want them to be,
it's gonna look like this.
hero hero cta1.
And then the next one is hero hero cta2.
And that should put them sort of side-by-side,
hero's gonna take up two heights
and the cta1 and cta2 are gonna take up their value.
So it doesn't look great here,
that's because we need to go ahead and select them now.
So the hero is just going to be grid-area: hero
and there we go, see it's starting to look a little nicer.
And these will automatically fall into place,
but let's explicitly place them.
So cta1 is going to be the grid-area: cta1
and obviously the next one's gonna be two.
Good, and that won't change anything
but we can see them showing up.
Let's go and style this hero value that we have here.
So we'll select that hero,
actually didn't we already select it?
We did, right here.
So we're gonna put a min-height on it of 400px.
Beautiful.
We're going to put a background on it of white,
and we're going to use a url images forward slash taco.jpg.
Looking good, background-size: cover.
Beautiful.
We'll background-position it into the bottom right,
so we'll sort of anchor it off of that taco,
so if we get a lot bigger, that taco image
is gonna anchor itself in the bottom right hand corner.
And we'll put a little bit of padding on that as well.
Beautiful, now let's work with this text here.
I want to get it to look like this,
where it's actually in the middle, to the right.
And I had initially done this with grid,
but this is actually a perfect use case for flexbox.
So let me show you here,
let's first grab those hero items,
and we'll put a background color, which is a yellow.
Good, and the design I want is just want them to be
as wide as the text is, right.
But the problem is that they are grid items,
they're not inside of a wrapper,
they are themselves grid items.
So if we look at the HTML here,
you'll see that our grid would be the hero,
we would display grid on that,
and then the H1 and the paragraph tag
are gonna be our grid items.
So let's actually try to do that.
So let's go back to our hero,
and we'll say display: grid
and with justify-content: center.
Oh, well, actually start.
Beautiful.
And align-content: center.
That puts them right where I want them.
The problem is that because it's column-based,
if we take it off the top and turn on the header,
the columns are just gonna be as wide as the longest one
and I want this yellow to stop exactly right here.
And that's just how it works,
one column is always going to be as wide as the other.
So this is the perfect use case, instead of using grid,
we're gonna display: flex on that item.
We're going to say flex-direction: column,
so they go top to bottom.
And we'll say justify-items: center,
No?
Let me take these off.
I really don't know what they do, I just try.
Align-items: center? No.
Align-items: start? Or flex-start?
And justify-items: center.
No.
Justify-content: center.
There we go.
That's exactly what I want, I put a little bit of padding,
5px on those, beautiful.
That's exactly what we want,
and that's a good use case for using flexbox over CSS grid
when you want each of them to be a variable width.
Now let's go onto these call to action values here.
So say anything with a class of call to action on it,
background is going to be that yellow that we like to use.
Beautiful, put a little bit
on our top value, we'll put a grid gap of 20px on it
so they're not butting up totally against each other.
Now I wanna perfectly center all of the text
right inside of here, so we'll go back down
to our cta and and we'll display: grid right on those.
So we'll say align-items: center and justify-items: center,
and that will center them for us.
Alternatively we could've just said
place items center center,
and there's a little bit, let's turn on the grid
for one of these.
You see that they are stretching to whatever the height is,
and in this value I want them to suctioned
into the actual middle.
So for that we are going to justify-content,
or no sorry, align-content: center,
and that will put them right in the middle.
There is a little bit of margin on them,
so we'll say cta p, margin: 0,
and that will get rid of them.
See how I like to have them just right bang in the middle
regardless of how high the value is available to us.
So that's a good use case for that.
I'm going to take the price,
so sorry I'll put this down here,
anything with a class of price, font-size: 60px.
Beautiful, and then we'll just put
font-weight of 300 on that.
Good, that's looking good.
That whole top value is done for us,
let's move on to doing the navigation.
So we'll go ahead and select the menu ul,
and we want all these items here,
the tacos, beer, wine, dessert,
we want them to take up as much space as they can
and that's a good use for our minmax.
So we'll say grid-template-columns,
repeat, auto-fit, minmax.
We want the minimum to be 100px,
the maximum to be 1fr.
So let's see where that gets us.
Nowhere, because I did not display: grid on that.
Awesome, looking good, we can take off all of the padding,
margin, and we can say list-style: none
and that will get rid of the dots that we have there.
And then instead of styling the li's,
we're actually going to style the links.
So we'll say .menu a,
background the yellow value that we like.
Now what's going on which each of these?
Why are they not spreading all the way across?
Well, display: block on those links
and they'll go all the way across,
because by default links are inline,
and they just go as wide as they need to be
but we want them to be block
and they'll take up all the space we have.
Text-decoration: none.
Padding: 10px.
Text-align: center.
Color, that black color that we like to use.
Looking pretty good, maybe text-transform: uppercase.
I like it.
Bump up the font size
a little bit as well.
Good, so that is all of our values there,
we'll go back up to this grid and say,
we'll put some gap on it, maybe 10px.
Looking good, and we'll also put some margin
on the top of each, on the top and bottom of it.
Alright, tacos, beers, wines, desserts.
I'm pretty happy with that.
Now let's, while we're focused on this,
let's hide this menu button.
So I'm just gonna go over to my inspector here,
go over to the rules.
And I'm actually using aria attributes here
to hide and show the button, rather than a bunch of classes.
So aria controls menu-list,
we're just gonna totally hide that button
and then we're gonna control the open and state close
with this aria-expanded attribute.
So go down here, and we'll say aria-controls menu-list,
that's an attribute selector in CSS.
So based on the attribute being aria-controls menu-list,
display: none, and that will then hide it.
And then we'll come back to that
when we hit our media queries in order to show it
and move this up top and a bunch of other stuff.
Good, let's move over to the features section here.
And inside of the feature we have a bunch of features.
So features is going to be display: grid,
and then the grid-template-columns is going to be,
let's do our whole repeat, auto-fit, minmax,
minimum of 200px, maximum of 1fr.
Let's give that a save.
See, looking good.
Let's actually style each feature and then we can see
if it's actually responsive.
So feature, background, let's just do white for now,
we'll come back to that in a second.
Padding: 10px.
Border: 1px solid white.
And text-align: center,
and box-shadow: 0 0 4px rgba(0,0,0,0.1).
Looking good, we'll go back up to our features
and put some gap on that.
grid-gap: 20px.
Now this should be responsive by nature
because we've used this auto-fit minmax deal
that we like to use, so as I resize,
as I get smaller, there we go.
It goes all the way down to one column.
We can play with these icons as well,
so feature icon, font-size: 50px,
and looking good to me.
Maybe I'll make this text a little bit gray.
Good!
That's looking good to me.
Let's move onto this about section,
which has the featured taco.
About, background: white, padding: 50px.
We'll make it a display: grid.
And I want this image to be 400px wide
and then the rest of the text, the rest of the space
will be reserved for the text.
So let's do the first column 400px and the rest 1fr,
and that should put everything right side-by-side.
Now I wanna vertically center everything,
so align-items: center, and that will
vertically center everything else.
I could also horizontally center it,
but because of how this works it wouldn't do any different.
That's looking pretty good,
it's just bumped up a bit so I'll say margin: 0.
Actually, you know what we can do,
instead of having to put margin
on every single one of these things, if I go to my menu,
you know how I put margin on that as well?
All of this stuff is all bumping up against each other.
What we can do is we can make our wrapper,
let's go above the top and select our wrapper.
And that's gonna be display: grid.
We're not going to actually put any columns in it,
but what that's going to do is it's going to allow us
to do something like grid-gap: 20px,
and then every single one of the items,
if we look at our DOM here,
the DOM, this is our wrapper, we have top,
we have menu, we have features, we have about,
and we have gallery.
All of those items are now going to be spaced 20px apart,
and I don't have to worry about doing
margin-top or margin-bottom on any of these items.
This is also going to allow us to use the order property
to put the menu above the top section
when we hit a certain breakpoint.
So let's finish up the rest of the site down here.
We did the about, let's look at the Instant Grams.
So we'll go to the bottom here.
Gallery, I wanna display: grid on the gallery itself,
and I want them to be 200px minimum, 1fr maximum.
So say let's display, grid-template-columns: repeat,
auto-fit, see how we use this a lot in the real world?
auto, 1fr.
200px, 1fr.
Looking good-ish, so what I did to show you what's,
to have each and every one of them be a different photo,
is I actually made them all a little bit different sizes.
They start at 201 and go up to 210,
so now that's looking kinda funky so we have to a little bit
of CSS to slightly adjust those.
So grid-gap: 20px on each of those.
And I'll say gallery img, width: 100%.
Now it's looking a little bit nicer for us,
but I want this H2 to go all the way across.
You see how the H2 is going to be a grid item,
as if the gallery is a grid?
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna select that H2
and make it span all the way across.
Start at one, go to the end.
Bam, looking good.
But, let's do this pretty snazzy,
look at this Instant Grams snazzy scroll in and scroll out.
So what we're gonna do is we're actually
going to make this H2.
Let's actually move this below the image
for my sanity's sake.
Oh my gosh, I turn off my auto-formatting
because it screws up the grid template areas
and then when I screw up the rest of it,
(laughs) I'm all goofed up.
So we have a H2, which is a grid item,
but we'll also display: grid on that.
Now, you might be saying Wes,
what are the grid items on an H2?
Well, we're actually going to be using
a before and after attribute for these kind of
these yellow bars that go to the right and to the left.
And what's neat is that before and after
they are considered grid items, just along with
the actual content inside of the H2.
So we're going to make some items that go to the left
and to the right of this H2 tag here.
So we'll say gallery h2:before,
and gallery h2:after.
We will display: block on them.
Content set to nothing, so that they're actually items.
Height of 10px, and the background,
let's just do a background of yellow for now,
we're gonna change it to a gradient in just a second.
So I've got, look it, I've got these bars
these are before and after bars that show up.
If I were to inspect element,
you'll see that my H2 has a before, a text, and an after.
And these three things are going to be our grid items.
Now I want the text to be in the middle,
and then I want the before and after
to split whatever is left.
So we can go to this H2 and we can say
grid-template-columns: 1fr auto 1fr
and that will immediately just put them
right next to each other,
and now that's kinda butting up a little bit close
so we can use some grid-gap for that.
Looking good, and then if I want to vertically center them,
we use align-items and that will put them
to the left and to the right.
Now I want them to be gradients, not this background color.
So I'll say background: linear-gradient,
and we say to left, and then our variable yellow.
And we want it to go to transparent.
So the way that gradients work is that you tell it
the direction, what you want it to start at,
and what you want to stop at.
You can put multiple stops in there,
but this is just a very simple start stop,
figure it out in between.
And that will put it from left to right.
Now the problem is that the after
needs to be flipped around, needs to be to right.
So what I can do is just select that again,
and just duplicate it.
And then change that left to right,
and we can call it a day.
But what is also cool about this is we could change this
to be a variable var, and we could make a direction variable
and fall back to the default left if it's not there.
And let me remove this.
So that's back where we were.
And then on the after, all we have to do
is set that variable direction to be right.
And then it will flip that value,
because it will overwrite it, it comes after this.
And we've got this nice little thing.
You can also do this pretty simply in flexbox as well,
but it doesn't really matter all that much.
Alright let's start working on some of the responsive stuff.
So we'll do it top to bottom, we'll start with
this top section in here where, if you remember,
we did hero hero call to action one,
hero hero call to action two.
And what I wanna do is as we get smaller,
I want to put the $1.99 and $3.99 underneath it
and let this picture span all the way across.
So we'll go down to the bottom here,
give ourselves a media query, so we'll do max-width: 700px,
and I'll say the top value, and all we have to do here
is just redefine what the layout looks like.
So we'll say grid-template-areas, and the value
is going to simply be hero hero,
and cta1 and cta2.
And because the values are already assigned to hero area,
cta1 area, and cta2 area, it should just automatically
change 'em up.
So we'll go over
to our inspector here, and as I resize,
let's actually turn on the grid inspector first.
See cta1, cta2, and as we hit that value
they go below each other and we just re-layout
what that value looks like.
We'll do one more, just copy paste this media query
and when we hit 500px, we're just gonna bring it down
to one column and all we need to do now is just say
hero, and then the next line cta1, and the next line cta2.
Now that should do it.
Bup, bup, bup!
There we go,
looking really good, it's still currently
scrolling horizontal because of some other stuff
that we have on the page,
that will be fixed as we go through the website.
So that's good, let's go onto the next one
which is the responsive menu.
The first thing I actually want to do is
once we hit 1000px media query, we're going to move
the menu above the actual top thing that we have here.
So I'm gonna duplicate this media query.
And we're gonna switch it to 1000px.
And I'm going to take the menu, and I say order: -1
and what that should do is,
because menu is a direct descendant of our wrapper,
and because our wrapper is already display: grid-ed-ed,
by putting it order: -1, and there it is,
it put it above the actual top instead of in between
so we've reordered the actual values that we have there.
At that point, we also want to show the button,
so what was the button that we had earlier,
it was the aria-controls menu-list,
so I'm gonna grab that selector, paste that in there.
We're going to display: block,
and put some margin-bottom on the bottom there.
So that's our menu that we have showing up.
Now because this is my mobile value,
I want to hide the actual ul.
So the way I'm going to do that
is to select the menu, .menu ul
then I say max-height: 0 and the reason why,
this will become apparent why I'm doing this
in just a second.
And I'm going to transform it by rotating X 90 degrees.
And what that actually does is it hides the menu for us,
it has just rotated it up.
And I'm gonna show you how when we click this button
in just a second it's going to hide and show
the different values that we want.
I'm also gonna put a transition on it of 0.5 seconds.
Transition: all, 0.5 seconds.
Then we need to go to this button
and inspect it, and when it's clicked, I need the
aria-expanded to be set to true or to false,
back and forth, back and forth.
So we're gonna write a little bit of JavaScript to do that.
Initially I had done it with a checkbox hack,
but I found out that the checkbox hack was not accessible
so we're gonna do it with some JavaScript,
which is more accessible.
So we'll go down to our script here,
and we'll grab that nav button.
So we'll say const navButton
is equal to document.querySelectorAll
and we're gonna select it based on it's a button
with an aria-expanded attribute on it.
Then we're going to make a function called toggleNav,
and then just say console log toggle.
And then we'll listen for a click on that nav button,
so let's say navButton.addEventlistener,
and listen for a click,
and when that click happens we're going to toggle the nav.
So if I go to my console here, I click this button,
Oh! I screwed it up.
addEvent, luh, listener.
Capital L, there we go, nope.
And still not a problem, and that is because
I query selected all, I just need querySelector.
We don't want a node list, we want just one node,
the first one that it finds.
There we go.
And now when I click it,
I get toggle is running a number of times, good.
Now inside of this toggleNav,
we are going to destructure the target.
And let's try console.log the target, see what we got.
The target is the button itself, it's the thing
that was clicked, and now what we want to do is
get the aria-expanded attribute.
So we'll say const expanded equals target,
that's the button itself, dot getAttribute aria-expanded.
And we wanna see if it is a string of true,
so console.log expanded and see what value we got.
So it's currently false,
but it actually doesn't return a boolean,
it returns a string of false, so we have to do this little
funky thing where we check if the value
is triple equals to a string of true,
otherwise we're gonna fall back to a boolean of false.
And then we console.log expanded.
You see, we should get, there we go,
booleans of true and false.
In this case it's only false, so good.
Then what we wanna do is set the attribute of our expanded
to be the opposite of what it currently is.
So we'll take our nav button,
and we'll set the attribute of aria-expanded
to be the opposite of the expanded value.
So bang, now we'll just convert true to false
and false to true, and now when we click it,
it should go back and forth between the two.
So we'll have to open up our inspector,
look at the button, and as you click it you see that the
aria-expanded value goes back and forth, back and forth.
So that's all the JavaScript we need to write,
the rest is going to be done in CSS.
So we'll go down to our responsive start,
we'll go down to our 1000px media query,
and we'll say when aria-expanded is equal to true,
the unordered list that comes after it,
this is a tilde selector, sort of like a future sibling,
so whatever unordered list comes in the future,
it's the next one beside it,
then we are going to display: grid on that,
we'll set the max-height to be 500px,
that's just for,
that's just so that we can actually transition it.
And most importantly, we're gonna transform the rotate value
to be zero degrees, or just zero in that case.
And that should actually show it.
So hey, hey, hey!
Now when you click it,
it goes whoop, whoop!
Whoop, whoop!
Opens and closes itself, I'm not totally convinced
on this actual flip out, we're going from rotate 90 degrees
to rotate X zero degrees.
But what you can do is select the parent
of the unordered list, which is the menu,
and put a perspective of something like 800px on it.
Actually we already have a selector for the menu,
let's move that up here
and get rid of this extra selector.
And that should give us a bit more of a convincing,
yeah there we go, it's a bit more of a convincing
go in and out value for us.
Oh, so now,
(laughs)
I've go a bit of a issue here with the buttons actually
still being there.
So we rotated X,
put a max-height of zero, I'm probably forgetting something
let me see here.
Oh, there we go.
Overflow: hidden.
There we go, that will hide its value there,
so now when I click it, bloop, bloop, bloop!
Change that perspective back, the 800px is a little bit much
and the only reason I have this max-height
and this max-height here, if I take those off,
let me show you what actually happens is
it will just like animate itself in and out,
but it won't actually slide up,
and there's no way to slide up to height: auto,
so this is a little trick you can do in CSS
to slide it up to hide to zero.
Good, I'm pretty happy with that.
The other thing is that this X value here,
we need to hide and show that,
and if we look at the HTML values
we have spans inside of them with a class of open
and a class of close.
So we'll go right here and we'll say, copy this.
When the aria-expanded is equal to false,
the close span inside of that will be display: none.
Good, see that just hid the little X right here.
And then when the aria-expanded is equal to true,
the open will be display: inline-block.
So far, so good.
Now you click it, and now the only problem is
that now the little hamburger doesn't show itself.
So I gotta do one more selector here,
when it is open, the close button
is going to be display: none.
And that should allow us to toggle between the two.
Or not close, the open and this should be the close.
There we go.
So close it, there we go, it's opening and closing,
switching the actual value,
you could also put a width on this value here,
see how it's sort of moving but I'll let you fiddle with
the fixed width or making that display grid
or whatever it is that you wanna do
to actually fix that guy.
So that's fixed, the menu,
this is automatically responsive.
Now our taco, so once we hit,
I don't know, about right here,
I'd say that's probably around 700px which is down here.
We'll add it to our 700px media query,
so actually sorry that's right here.
Our about, yeah we're just gonna bring it down to one column
so grid-template-column: 1fr,
and that will just make everything one column.
And once we hit that value, there we go.
It makes itself one column instead of the two
that we previously set it to.
So I really like grid in responsive
because almost always it's simply just redefining
what the grid looks like, and then children will just
snap to where they look to,
regardless of if you've used fr and pixel values,
or if you've used template areas to figure that out.
Then finally, our Instant Grams at the end here.
Those are by default responsive as well
'cause we used minmax and there's nothing
need to be done there.
So everything is looking totally responsive to me.
Hopefully you learned a thing or two along that,
and you can implement some grid into your own value.
See you in the next one.
(rock music)